doc: update contributing guide (#25)
notaryproject/.github: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing Guidelines

This document offers an overview of the process for users to contribute by either opening a pull request or reporting an issue. For more more information about the Notary Project, please refer to the [Notary Project Overview](https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/blob/main/README.md).

## Reporting a Security Issue

> > **Warning** If you are reporting a security vulnerability, Please DO NOT open a public issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!Warning]
> If you are reporting a security vulnerability, Please DO NOT open a public issue.
```
it renders as

> [!Warning]
> If you are reporting a security vulnerability, Please DO NOT open a public issue.

Please refer to [Security Guide](SECURITY.md) on how to report security vulnerabilities.

## Reporting an Issue

Reporting an issue is a great way to contribute. Please open an issue on Github with required information.

Prior to opening a new issue, we kindly request that you check the existing issues to prevent duplicate submissions. In the event that you come across an issue that aligns with your problem please do following:

- Carefully review the issue description and comments to validate that your issue aligns with a similar problem. It's important to note that a specific error could potentially be associated with various issues. Additionally, you might discover a potential solution or workaround in the comments section
- To receive notifications regarding an issue, just click the 'subscribe' button
- Please only comment if you have new, technical, and relevant information to add to the case.

Issues will be marked with different labels for different purpose, see [Labels](#labels) for details.

> ### Issue Lifecycle

Reviewer: Can an issue be converted to a discussion?

The issue lifecycle is mainly driven by the maintainers.

1. Issue creation:
   - After an issue is created, it will be labelled `bug` or `enhancement`, and `triage`.
2. Triage: The maintainers will triage the issues on a regular basis. The results of triage could be one of the following:
   - Remove label `triage`, and add the issues to the correct milestone

>    - Remove label `triage`, and labelled `question` to indicate this issue need further information. After this issue is clarified with further information, it could be added to the correct milestone or labelled `wont fix`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Remove the 'triage' label and apply the 'question' label to indicate that this issue requires additional information. Once this issue has been clarified with the necessary details, it can then be assigned to the appropriate milestone or labeled as 'wont fix'.
```

>    - Remove the `triage` label and apply the `question` label to indicate that this issue requires additional information. Once this issue has been clarified with the necessary details, it can then be assigned to the appropriate milestone or labeled as `wont fix`.

Reviewer: What if a bug issue cannot be reproed?

>    - Remove label `triage`, and labelled `wont fix` to indicate this issue is out of the scope of the Notary Project or other reasons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Remove the 'triage' label and assign the 'wont fix' label to signify that this issue falls outside the scope of the Notary Project or for other relevant reasons.
```

3. Development:
   - An issue labelled `enhancement` normally require solution proposal and spec updates if needed before implementation
   - An issue that is labeled as `enhancement` or `bug` should be connected to the PR that resolves it

> 4. Issue closure

Reviewer: Note that there are two ways to [close an issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/closing-an-issue).
- Close as planned (default)
- Close as not planned

Author: @shizhMSFT do you mean stale issues? Any other cases that issue was closed as not planned? I don't think we need to enumerate all the scenarios, just the major scenarios are enough.

Reviewer: @yizha1 See the following picture:
<img width="326" alt="image" src="https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/assets/32161882/584941fc-42c3-4b6c-b57e-f4ea0e0f5822">

>    - Close the issue once PRs are merged

Reviewer: What if an issue requires multiple PRs?

Author: Multiple PRs need to be completed before an issue is closed

   - Close the issue once the author accepts the `wont fix` decision

### Stale issues or PRs

> A stale issue is one that has not had any activity or updates for 60 days. A stale pull request (PR) is one that has not had any activity or updates for 45 days. When an issue or PR becomes stale, it is labelled as `stale`. Normally maintainers will comment on stale issue or PR to prompt participants to take action. Then, if no additional activity occurs after 30 days, this issue or PR will be closed. If an update/comment occur on stale issues or pull requests, the stale label will be removed and the timer will restart.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A stale issue is one that remains inactive or without updates for a period of 60 days. A stale pull request (PR) is one that  remains inactive or without updates for 45 days. When an issue or PR becomes stale, it is labelled as `stale`. Normally maintainers will comment on stale issue or PR to prompt participants to take action. If there is no activity for additional 30 days, this issue or PR will be closed. If an update/comment occur on stale issues or pull requests, the stale label will be removed and the timer will restart.
```

| Milestone           | Description                                                                                                                       |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `discuss`           | This milestone includes issues or PRs that require discussion before they can be added to the correct milestone.                  |
| `future`            | This milestone includes issues or PRs that are valuable but are not currently planned for release.                                |
| `<Release Version>` | This milestone includes issues or PRs that are planned for a specific release. The format is `vX.Y.Z`, For example, `v1.1.0`, `v1.2.0`. See [Release Versioning](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/RELEASE_MANAGEMENT.md#release-versioning) for details. |

## Support requests or questions

Please use slack channel for support requests or questions. Issues could be created accordingly if it is a bug or enhancement.

## Contributing Workflow

> PR are always welcome, even if they only contain small fixes like typos or a few lines of code. If there will be a significant effort, please document it as an issue and get a discussion going before starting to work on it.-

Reviewer: nit: `PR` --> `PRs`

  - Catch up with [past meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@CNCFNotary)

## Reporting Security Issues

If you are reporting a security vulnerability, Please DO NOT file a public issue.

Please refer to [Security Guide here](SECURITY.md) on how to report security vulnerabilities.

## Reporting Other Issues

It is a great way to contribute to notary project by reporting issues. Please open an issue on Github and follow the template to fill in required information.

Before opening any issue, please look up the existing issues to avoid submitting a duplication. If you found an issue that describes your problem:

- please read other user comments first, and confirm this is the same issue: a given error condition might be indicative of different problems - you may also find a workaround in the comments
- please refrain from adding "same thing here" or "+1" comments
- you don't need to comment on an issue to get notified of updates: just hit the "subscribe" button
- comment if you have some new, technical and relevant information to add to the case

Issues will be marked with different labels for different purpose, see [Labels](#labels) for details.

> ### Issue Lifecycle

Reviewer: How about stale issue and PRs?

   - Keep label `triage` to indicate that further triage is required.
   - Remove label `triage`, and labelled `wont fix` to indicate this issue is out of the scope of Notary or other reasons.
3. Development:
   - An issue labelled `enhancement` normally require solution proposal and spec updates if needed before implementation
   - An issue that is labeled as `enhancement` or `bug` should be connected to the PR that resolves it
4. Issue closure
   - Close the issue once PRs are merged
   - Close the issue once the author accepts the `wont fix` decision.

## Support requests or questions

Please use slack channel for support requests or questions. Issues could be created accordingly if it is a bug or enhancement.

## Contributing Workflow

PR are always welcome, even if they only contain small fixes like typos or a few lines of code. If there will be a significant effort, please document it as an issue and get a discussion going before starting to work on it.

Please submit a PR broken down into small changes bit by bit. A PR consisting of a lot of features and code changes may be hard to review. It is recommended to submit PRs in an incremental fashion.

> Note: If you split your pull request to small changes, please make sure any of the changes goes to main will not break anything. Otherwise, it can not be merged until this feature complete.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
> **Note** If you split your pull request to small changes, please make sure any of the changes goes to main will not break anything. Otherwise, it cannot be merged until this feature complete.
```

Reviewer: Renders as
> **Note** If you split your pull request to small changes, please make sure any of the changes goes to main will not break anything. Otherwise, it cannot be merged until this feature complete.

> - Fork and clone

Reviewer: Consider `###` instead of `-`.

---

For example:

### Fork and clone
Fork the repository and clone the code to your local workspace.

### Branch
Changes should be made on your own fork in a new branch checked out from the `main` branch.

  Fork the repository and clone the code to your local workspace.

- Branch

  Changes should be made on your own fork in a new branch checked out from the `main` branch.

> - Develop, Build and Test

Reviewer: nit: You may apply [Oxford comma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial_comma).
```suggestion
- Develop, Build, and Test
```

  Write code on the new branch in your fork. Unit test cases should be added to cover the new code. For PR in [notation](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation), end-to-end (e2e) test cases should be added, see [e2e quick start](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/test/e2e/README.md)

- Keep sync with upstream

  Once your branch gets out of sync with the `main` branch, please fetch and rebase from `main` branch.

- Commit

  As Notary project repositories has integrated the [DCO (Developer Certificate of Origin)](https://github.com/apps/dco) check tool, contributors are required to sign off that they adhere to those requirements by adding a `Signed-off-by` line to the commit messages. Git has even provided a `-s` command line option to append that automatically to your commit messages, please use it when you commit your changes.

  Notary project repositories require signed commits, please refer to [commit signatures verification](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/managing-commit-signature-verification/about-commit-signature-verification) on signing commits.

- Push and Create PR

>   When ready for review, push your branch to your fork repository, and [create a new pull request (PR)](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request?tool=webui). Description of a pull request should refer to all the issues that it addresses. Remember to put a reference to issues (such as Closes #XXX and Fixes #XXX) in commits so that the issues can be closed when the PR is merged.

Reviewer: > such as Closes #XXX and Fixes #XXX

Consider linking the doc at https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue#linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue-using-a-keyword

1. Issue creation:
   - After an issue is created, it will be labelled `bug` or `enhancement`, and `triage`.
2. Triage: The maintainers will triage the issues on a regular basis. The results of triage will be one of the following:
   - Remove label `triage`, and add the issues to the correct milestone.
   - Remove the `triage` label and apply the `question` label to indicate that this issue requires additional information. Once this issue has been clarified with the necessary details, it can then be assigned to the appropriate milestone or labeled as `wont fix`.
   - Remove the `triage` label and assign the `wont fix` label to signify that this issue falls outside the scope of the Notary Project or for other relevant reasons.
3. Development:
   - An issue labelled `enhancement` normally require solution proposal and spec updates if needed before implementation
   - An issue that is labeled as `enhancement` or `bug` should be connected to the PR that resolves it
4. Issue closure: Follow the [guidance](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/closing-an-issue)
   - Close as completed once PRs are merged.

>    - Close as completed once the author accepts the `wont fix` decision.

Author: If the author does not reply, the issue will become stale, then it will be closed as not planned eventually. If the author does not accept the decision, then this issue will not be closed, and the discussion continues in the issue. I updated the description according to GitHub guidance for simplicity.

>    - Close as not planned if a bug cannot be reproduced with the author's agreement. Create a new issue if this bug is reproduced in the future.

Author: `Close as not planned` is provided by GitHub, see [guidance](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/closing-an-issue). A screenshot for two options:

![image](https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/assets/107919912/bfa61ee4-96e9-4592-bf9a-6b8cd30e10c8)

I have updated the texts for better explanation.

   - Close as not planned by transforming the issue to GitHub discussion with the author's agreement, if an issue contains open-ended conversations that don’t necessarily have a specific goal or outcome in mind.

### Stale issues or PRs

> A stale issue is one that remains inactive or without updates for a period of 60 days. A stale pull request (PR) is one that remains inactive or without updates for a period of 45 days. When an issue or PR becomes stale, it is labelled as `stale`. Normally maintainers will comment on stale issue or PR to prompt participants to take action. If there is no activity for additional 30 days, this issue or PR will be closed. If an update/comment occur on stale issues or pull requests, the stale label will be removed and the timer will restart.

Author: This practice is referred from the ORAS community. [Based on the current issue statistics](https://hackmd.io/LkKAC-5hROeEwMOPNc_D3w?view#Issues-in-last-6-months) and maintainer activities, I believe that the duration is not that long, and we can continuously improve the number over time.

For maintainers' activity, it was defined in governance guide.

## Milestones

The Notary Project uses [milestones](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/using-labels-and-milestones-to-track-work/about-milestones) to track progress on groups of issues or pull requests in a repository. The following table defines the milestones that used by the Notary Project.

| Milestone           | Description                                                                                                                       |

> | ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

Reviewer 3: "discuss" and "future" are a bit vague. Wouldn't labels like "in discussion" and "backlog" be better?

## Support requests or questions

Please use slack channel for support requests or questions. Issues could be created accordingly if it is a bug or enhancement.

## Contributing Workflow

PR are always welcome, even if they only contain small fixes like typos or a few lines of code. If there will be a significant effort, please document it as an issue and get a discussion going before starting to work on it.

Please submit a PR broken down into small changes bit by bit. A PR consisting of a lot of features and code changes may be hard to review. It is recommended to submit PRs in an incremental fashion.

> **Note** If you split your pull request to small changes, please make sure any of the changes goes to main will not break anything. Otherwise, it cannot be merged until this feature complete.

### Fork and clone

  Fork the repository and clone the code to your local workspace.

### Branch

Changes should be made on your own fork in a new branch checked out from the `main` branch.

### Develop, Build, and Test

> Write code on the new branch in your fork. Unit test cases should be added to cover the new code. For PR in [notation](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation), end-to-end (e2e) test cases should be added, see [e2e quick start](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/test/e2e/README.md)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Write code on the new branch in your fork. You can try to build the notation project locally by following the [Building guide](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/building.md)

Unit test cases should be added to cover the new code. For PR in [notation](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation), end-to-end (e2e) test cases should be added, see [e2e quick start](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/test/e2e/README.md)
```

### Keep sync with upstream

Once your branch gets out of sync with the `main` branch, please fetch and rebase from `main` branch.

### Commit

> As Notary project repositories has integrated the [DCO (Developer Certificate of Origin)](https://github.com/apps/dco) check tool, contributors are required to sign off that they adhere to those requirements by adding a `Signed-off-by` line to the commit messages. Git has even provided a `-s` command line option to append that automatically to your commit messages, please use it when you commit your changes. For example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As Notary project repositories require [DCO (Developer Certificate of Origin)](https://github.com/apps/dco) in PR workflow, contributors are required to sign off that they adhere to those requirements by adding a `Signed-off-by` line to the commit messages. Git has even provided a `-s` command line option to append that automatically to your commit messages, please use it when you commit your changes. For example:
```

Author: The purpose is to tell the users that notary project enforces DCO for pull requests. CI check is different.

```shell

> git commit -s -m <commit_message>

Reviewer 3: We should have both `-s` for sign-off and `-S` for signed commits. We should also link to the instructions how to set up a private key on the machine.

Reviewer 4: +1. SSH Key is much easier to set up than GPG Key from our testing. Shall we recommend contributors use SSH key to sign commits and link to https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/managing-commit-signature-verification/about-commit-signature-verification#ssh-commit-signature-verification?

Author: Thanks @toddysm. The how-to was mentioned after the command example.

`
Notary project repositories require signed commits, please refer to [commit signatures verification](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/managing-commit-signature-verification/about-commit-signature-verification) on signing commits.`

@FeynmanZhou the above guide mentioned three options. I think users can choose the best way for them.

```

Notary project repositories require signed commits, please refer to [commit signatures verification](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/managing-commit-signature-verification/about-commit-signature-verification) on signing commits.

### Push and Create PR

> 

Reviewer 4: We can remind PR authors to follow the [conventional commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/). This can be added in a follow-up PR.

3. Development:
   - An issue labelled `enhancement` normally require solution proposal and spec updates if needed before implementation
   - An issue that is labeled as `enhancement` or `bug` should be connected to the PR that resolves it

> 4. Issue closure: Follow the [guideance](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/closing-an-issue)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Issue closure: Follow the [guidance](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/closing-an-issue)
```
